hello
if you have found the ideas i discussed
interesting and useful
perhaps you might consider purchasing my
recently released book beyond order
12 more rules for life available from
penguin random house in print or audio
format
you could use the links we provide below
or buy through amazon or at your local
bookstore
this new book beyond order
provides what i hope is a productive and
interesting walk through ideas that are
both philosophically and sometimes
spiritually meaningful
as well as being immediately
implementable and practical
beyond order can be read and understood
on its own
but also builds on the concepts that i
developed in my previous books 12 rules
for life
and before that
maps of meaning
thanks for listening and enjoy the
podcast
[Music]
hello everyone i have the pleasure today
of speaking with bishop robert barron
we've spoken before on youtube but felt
that it was worthwhile doing so again
it's been a long time and many people
have reached out to both of us
continually asking us to converse and so
we felt that that would be um useful and
something at least in principle of
of public interest
bishop baron is the founder of word on
fire catholic ministries and auxiliary
bishop of the archdiocese of los angeles
he's a number one amazon best-selling
author and has published numerous books
essays and articles on theology and the
spiritual life he has been invited to
speak about religion
at the headquarters of facebook google
and amazon
and is one of the most followed
catholics in the world
on social media
thanks for agreeing to talk with me
again and i'm looking forward to this
conversation
yeah my pleasure jordan great to see you
too
so
why do you think that
people have written to you and to me
suggesting that we converse what's your
take on this
it's surprising to me in some sense
because it's it's not really my
bailiwick you know although obviously
i've been
putting my nose in there anyways
i think for a number of reasons people
see the work you do as at least opening
a door
to the religious dimension of life for a
deeper dimension of life
i'll tell you a story i got up in front
of the bishops of the united states
because i was chairman of our
committee on evangelization and i talked
about why we're losing a lot of young
people i went through some of the
statistics and then reasons why we're
losing them and then i gave various
signs of hope
and one of the signs of hope i gave was
i called it the jordan peterson
phenomenon and what i meant was this i
told the bishops
here's this gentleman gets up
in a pretty non-histrionic way
and speaks for several hours in some
cases
about the bible
and young people all over the
english-speaking world are listening to
them in theaters and they're by their
millions on youtube and i said you know
i'm not here to endorse everything that
jordan peterson is saying but i think
that in itself
is a sign of hope
and so that became a source of some
conversation among the bishops but i do
think it's a sign of hope and i said to
them and it's really in some ways to our
shame that you are making the bible more
compelling and appealing in many ways
than we were
so that's our that's our bailiwick
that's our profession as the bible but
you were opening the bible up in a way
that young people especially were
finding very compelling and you were
indeed i think thereby opening a door
toward a you know a richer and fuller
understanding of the scriptures i think
that's part of it
but i also think it's the opening to the
realm of objective value
so i think as i read you and listen to
you you talk a lot about
uh the the objective realm of value
that's not simply a matter of
my subjective whim that you know i'll
decide what to do or i make up my values
as i go along but there's something
about the tradition something about
what's been given to us an objectivity
to
moral value aesthetic value intellectual
value
and see to me that's i mean it's a good
way a gateway drug to religion because
god i would say is the ground and the
source
of objective value
and when you sort of hyper-subjectivize
the whole operation
that becomes you know questionable so i
think your work there too has has sort
of primed the pump
for a deeper exploration of god
as the source of these objective values
there's a couple thoughts i'd have about
it but i remember it's almost as if we
need a third category
um subjective objective and something
else
that that is a an admixture of both i
mean
there's things i come across information
in the biological sciences particularly
that
speak deeply of an intrinsic morality
and
you see this you can look at the work of
franz duvall for example who's a dutch
primatologist
and he's been studying the social
interactions of chimpanzees and
chimpanzees
share a tremendous
genetic overlap with human beings and
from an evolutionary perspective we
diverged from our common ancestor with
chimpanzees something like seven million
years ago
our cultures also share or our biology
also shares
uh properties with that of bonnabel's
but i'm going to talk about the chimps
for now
um
dewalt has been interested in
what makes a chimp leader so chimps
organize their societies essentially in
patriarchal fashion
the top chimp is male
that doesn't mean there aren't high
status females there are but
the fundamental power structure appears
let's say patriarchal and it's
in the popular eye
it's easy to assume that
the top chimp is
the the the most physically intimidating
but that's actually not the case what
dewall has shown was that is that
alpha chimps who maintain stable
sovereignty let's say
are
more engaged in reciprocal
interactions than all the other chimps
in the troop
so they're very
generous and reciprocal they play fair
now you can get the odd situation where
a chimp troop will be ruled by a tyrant
but
the structure becomes unstable and the
tyrant chimp tends to be overthrown by
coalitions of other male chimps torn to
pieces and so
and so then if you think
well maybe there is a pattern that
constitutes this is the
crucial issue as far as i'm concerned is
is there a pattern of behavior that
typifies stable sovereignty
and i think that's in some sense the
fundamental religious question
is there a pattern of behavior that
constitutes stable sovereignty and if so
what does it
consist of
yak pancep has looked at rat behavior
and
rats
juvenile male rats
engage in rough and tumble play and when
you pair them together
if one rat is 10 bigger than the other
he can dominate the lesser rat and so
they do that and they establish their
relative
dominance and then if you repeatedly
pair them together which is a crucial
issue it has to be repeated pairings
the
lesser rat has to invite the dominant
rat to play
so that's his role in the larger rat
agrees and plays
but if the larger rat doesn't let the
little rat win 30 of the time across
repeated play bouts the little rat will
stop playing
and what i read that it just blew me
away it's so significant because it
shows imagine that part of what morality
is it's
morality is precisely that pattern of
behavior
that serves to keep repeated
interactions going
and those repeated interactions might be
across days or weeks or months or years
or decades or centuries or eons
tremendously long time span and so what
you get is
the emergence of a pattern of behavior
that's stable for the individual and
stable for society and that
as that's instantiated more and more
deeply it becomes something we can
observe and something that we adapt to
and something that then becomes part of
our central nature and for me that's the
way into the that's the bridge between
biology and religion right there and
because there it looks like there's an
evolved ethic that even goes beyond
human beings
yeah no i wouldn't deny for a second
there was a biological ground for a lot
of this business and i'm with lonergan
the great canadian philosopher that the
condition for the possibility of real
objectivity is a properly constituted
subjectivity so i like your opening
comment about something that bridges the
two
uh we don't just live in you know the
subjective and objective as though
they're
discreet
but it's a properly constituted
subjectivity which means one free of
various prejudices one free of various
fears one free of games of self-denial
and all that that can properly intuit
the objective value and objective value
does indeed come up out of the physical
to some degree i mean we're we're
embodied uh creatures so the biological
plays a role in that for sure but i
think too it goes beyond it i mean it
goes beyond simply a question of of
survival of the individual or even of
the species but certain values
you know of the truth and beauty and and
the good that transcend that although
they're grounded in it for sure well
this is one of the things i really
wanted to ask you about because
i do think
in evolutionary terms and across the
time scale that evolutionary biologists
and physicists have come to accept and
so that's a universe that's about 15
billion years old on a planet that's
about 4.5 billion and with life being
three and a half and mammalian life say
being 60 million years
that's my time span
the biblical time span
is much truncated
in relationship to that um and that's
that sets up a certain tension between
the biblical stories certainly if
they're read as
objective truth but the catholic church
from my understanding has
and this comes from the pope himself the
catholic church has already accepted the
basic tenets of evolution but i don't
know yes is that wrong
sure oh no absolutely yes okay so so but
that begs the question because for me
and i'm sure this is part of the
sticking point for young people and
maybe for people in western culture in
general is that
it's easy to say that that
that evolutionary theory has been
accepted but that still begs the
question it's right okay so fine
you can you can look at the span of life
over
three and a half billion years before
you get to human beings but our
religious stories talk of a reality that
looks like it's about fifteen 000 years
old something like that right and so
that
i'm not blaming the church for that
obviously and i think the stories in the
bible are far older than five to ten
thousand years i suspect they were part
of an extraordinarily ancient oral
tradition that stretches back tens of
thousands of years because that's the
rule rather than the exception but
and i don't know to what degree the
catholic thinkers within the church are
working constantly to
attempt to reconcile these two
viewpoints apart from saying that they
they do accept them both yeah but i
don't think they're i think they're
apples and oranges in a way i mean i i
don't worry too much about that issue
i'm not trying to read the bible as a
scientific text it's not about the
evolutionary process it's a theological
and spiritual text that's discerning
truths that are i think available within
our experience
but there are discrete moments there i
mean
the scientist who talks about evolution
fine i've listened to him or her the
bible's not concerned so much with that
but it's giving us a theological
interpretation
of history and indeed of the cosmos but
not in scientific terms
so it has it has implications for our
understanding of the cosmos for sure and
of nature
of human nature but it's not done in a
scientific manner so it just predates as
you say i mean any of what we'd
associate now with the scientific method
the last biblical text is around me are
100 a.d and so it long predates that
preoccupation
so to me it's kind of an apple's oranges
issue
and it's i think a lot of that religion
science stuff
in that sense
is an early 20th century um
preoccupation that we should just get
beyond right but i don't i i think that
may be the case but i don't think people
have gone beyond it and
i i also think that and this pertains to
um
something we also talked about
discussing which was the continual drain
from the church the catholic church
perhaps in particular but perhaps not in
the west of young people
and i think part of that is
their inability to make intellectual
sense of
of
everything that they're faced with a
religious tradition and a scientific
tradition especially on the biological
front but not only that they don't know
where to place these things in their in
their
view of the world i think that's partly
why my lectures because you'd asked
about that had become popular because i
am trying to do that and
no i'll say this you look at the surveys
there's a lot of surveys now that ask
young people
precisely that question how come you
left
and people speculate oh it must be
because of the scandals or because you
know they had a bad experience in church
or something
number one reason across many years in
all the surveys
is i don't believe the teachings and
then to specify that religion and
science seem to be at odds with each
other so for young people the scientific
way of knowing is the way of knowing so
it's sort of scientism at least
implicitly holds sway in the minds of a
lot of young people so once you make
that move
knowledge equals the scientific manner
of knowing well then the bible is
non-scientific therefore it's you know
old superstition bronze age mythology
etc i see what you were doing jordan i
think
you were doing what a lot of the church
fathers did with the scriptures because
the church fathers are very interesting
people like origen and augustine and
chrysostom and those people they knew
fully well in the third and fourth
century that the bible should not simply
be read in a sort of you know
straightforwardly literalistic way
augustine knew that very clearly origin
do that clearly and they talk therefore
about the different senses of scripture
what you're doing i think in a lot of
your lectures is what origen would have
called
the moral sense of the bible the
tropological the given it's kind of
technical term
the biblical texts are about the moral
life now we might say today the
psychological life or what makes you
psychologically
healthier or more productive they would
have said the moral sense
they knew all about that and so the
texts began to open up
in these marvelous ways so you know noah
and the ark jacob and and wrestling with
the angel and the latter going up to
heaven et cetera et cetera if you start
fussing about you know the literal truth
of these stories you're going to miss
these really deep spiritual insights
which the church fathers knew very well
and i think you were in your own way
tapping into that and the fact that
young people were responding to it see i
think it's very encouraging that's why i
told the bishops it's a positive sign
that you were getting the audiences you
were getting around this well the
problem with the scientific viewpoint
technically speaking is that it's amoral
within it with within its own
with its within its own confines by by
definition it strives not to
address issues of value now it can't
help it because scientists have to
investigate some things and not others
so value enters into it but
by its own
nature science can't answer and tries
not to answer questions of value now it
gets more complicated when you look at
um
work like the primatology i discussed
earlier the origin of morality and
animals and game playing say among rats
that starts to move into the domain of
morality to some degree but the problem
with science is that it doesn't it
strips out all subjective meaning it's
designed to do that and that leaves
everyone at a loss about what to do with
the world of value and i do believe that
um stories in particular uh
address the world of value that's their
function that's and the world of value
is the world that that we act in it
they're guides to action well i come
across it all the time in my work on the
internet so i have you know dialogues
with people that interact with my videos
and they'll say things like well the
sciences give us access to the truth
period the scientific method that's how
you get to the truth and i'll say so
hamlet
tells you nothing true
plato tells you nothing true
t.s eliot's poetry tells you nothing
true i mean who who would believe that
except the most
ideologically scientistic person because
he might my fear is a lot of young
people are in the grip of that they're
in the grip of a real ideological thing
they don't know how to think their way
out of it and so they they just abandon
the attempt but it leaves them nowhere
what you were doing though is you're
showing a way out and and there there is
a way out and it's it's by you know an
introduction into the great masters of
these texts to show you how they
function
that's what a good preacher ought to be
doing you know so let let me throw
another objection then and this is
another stumbling block i think
and i think this emerges in
post-modernism in particular um because
the post-modernist there's reasons the
way for the for their
manner of thinking
so one reason is
so
artificial intelligence researchers
discovered in the early 1960s that
um
perceiving the landscape was much more
difficult than anybody had ever
suspected originally
it was sort of felt that objects were
just there in some simple way and the
complicated computational problem would
be how to move among the obvious objects
but it turned out that
it's really really difficult to perceive
the environment there's an infinite or
near infinite number of ways that you
can perceive even a finite set of
objects so um
and that means there's there's a
multitude of potential interpretations
for every set of events
and so that that that was a radical
discovery in the computational world but
the same discovery basically occurred at
the same time in the world of literary
analysis
for the same reason is that every text
is susceptible to a an inordinately
large number of interpretations and it's
not easy to identify the canonical
interpretation and maybe the canonical
interpretation isn't canonical it just
serves power for example and that would
be you know religion as the opiate of
the masses or or religion as a political
tool and i think that takes things far
too far but there's a real problem here
is that if you divorce the narrative
from the objective world and say well
the narrative is valuable because it
gives us a guide to value then you have
another problem is which in instantly
which is okay
which narrative and how do we make a
hierarchy of value among narratives we
would say hamlet is deeper than
um
harlequin romance
right but trying to specify why that is
and what deep means
is very very difficult and you might say
well the bible is the deepest of all
narratives but that still
begs the question well compared to
buddhist writings say compared to the
upanishads
or compared to any
long-term complex mythology that's
developed over thousands and thousands
of years what makes it canonical why is
it preferable to shakespeare for example
and so well i so
perhaps i could get you to address that
because that's a
vicious problem
there's a lot there and i'll start with
your opening remark by post-modernism
because i quite agree with you
i'm not simply anti-post-modern in fact
i wrote a book called toward a
post-liberal catholicism where i took in
a lot of the insights of the postmoderns
one of which is as you quite correctly
say
a sort of legitimate perspectivalism
that we never get reality you know too
cool right just open my eyes there's
reality again that's liner again it's
only a properly constituted subjectivity
that that
opens the door to the properly objective
but one of those ways of properly
constantly your subjectivity is to put
your subjectivity within a community of
discourse so it's never the case that i
simply intuit the way things are and end
of the argument no it's as lonergan said
it's not the kojito that was the trouble
with the enlightenment it's the
kojitamos it's always we think and that
means i have my perspective i bounce it
off your perspective you bounce off
somebody else's we have a disciplined
and structured conversation and in that
process all the different aspects of the
real begin to emerge or like my
intellectual hero john henry newman
said the contents of a real idea is
equivalent to the sum total of its
possible aspects that's about 1870 says
that which is really an extraordinary
thing because he anticipates in many
ways the phenomenologists you know when
they talk about uh walking around an
object and to intuit its essence thereby
and the walking around is not just i
walk around but you're walking around
and someone else is walking around we're
all
exchanging our points of view
and again i'd bring this into line with
catholicism which is always stress the
communitarian element that we know
precisely in the community of the church
now link to the bible
the bible's never like just open it up
you're a single subjective uh
viewer and now you take in its meaning
well no we've always said the bible is
read within the church in this long
interpretive tradition where i'm
bouncing it off of augustine's
perspective we've got it from origen who
now throws it to thomas aquinas who now
brings it to newman and then through
preachers and teachers through the
saints so you've got the technical
intellectual interpretation of the bible
then you have the saints who in many
ways they embody the bible so i'm going
to read a lot of the biblical stories in
light of friends of assisi in light of
teresa of calcutta et cetera
so i like that side if you want of the
post-modern which is much more attuned
to the
communal way in which we come to know
things
um
the big question you raised at the end
we could spend some time with that how
do you make ultimate judgments and
determinations like this one is right
you know well you you hinted at it a bit
there by saying well look many many
people have looked worked on this for a
very very long period of time and in
some sense it's a living document
right because right because it does have
to be the bible just doesn't exist as a
book on a shelf it's it's a pattern of
meaning within a context and the context
has to be taken into account um
so you say well there's a powerful
context for its interpretation it's also
a fundamental text in that
the bible is implicit in all sorts of
other great texts like shakespeare or
any anything that's a product of
judeo-christian culture that's a deep
product is deeply affected by the bible
so it's there implicitly whether you
like it or not and so it has to be taken
seriously i would say even if you don't
believe it but then to the degree that
you believe
the central axioms of western culture
you have to wonder how much of
what's biblical you do end up believing
because of its implicitness
oh yeah i mean it's all through the
western culture for sure um and the
question of belief you know in some ways
is the most fundamental question in all
of theology we call it fundamental
theology how do you how do you
articulate the meaning of belief
and
you know for the best people in our
tradition belief is always on the far
side of reason not the near side of
reason and that's a mistake that so many
people make today young people
especially
faith or belief they mistake for
credulity or superstition something
sub-rational and our best people of
course have always repudiated that
authentic faith is on the far side of
reason so reason's done all the work it
can and should do
but then there's this moment when
the claim is made
deus
right that god has spoken
now do i believe that or not
i think it's precisely analogous to
coming to know a person you know so i
know something about you just from
watching you over the years and i can
google you and i can read your books and
i can come to some sort of objective
knowledge of you uh now in this virtual
means i've you know met you and so my
mind is working trying to understand
where you're coming from but let's i
mean project into the future if you and
i uh
met in person you and i eventually
became friends
and at some point you spoke a truth
about yourself that i could never have
gotten on my own i could never have
gotten it from any objective source
you revealed something to me right of
your inner life and at that point i've
got to make a decision
well do i believe that or not i can't
prove it i can't
ratify it it's congruent with everything
i've known so that's one test i could
give if you told me something that's
just wildly incongruous with everything
else i know about you
i'd probably not believe that
but if you tell me something that's
congruent with what i know
but goes beyond it
and i have to say at that point okay i i
have to believe that or not i think
faith is like that in a way
so the bible i can approach into all
kinds of different ways but the claim
being made at the heart of the bible of
biblical revelation is
deus dixit
god has spoken god has said something in
this text
do i accept it and and that has to be a
decision
that's born of something beyond reason
not opposed to it
but beyond it
so that's i think where belief in the in
the religious sense comes in
so um
i have i understand that argument but i
have trouble with it i would say
um
so we could talk about faith a little
bit
um and this is
groping around in the darkness um
it seems to me that gratitude is a form
of faith
it's a dis it's like a decision
in some sense because you could look at
the world and you could say well there's
plenty of reasons to be grateful and
there's plenty of reasons not to be
and so the evidence doesn't necessarily
support one interpretation or another
but
a decision about whether or not to be
grateful is going to affect the way i
interpret the world and also perhaps the
way it reveals itself to me
and the way i act in it and the
consequences of my action
so i would say it seems to me to take
faith to be grateful and that seems to
be a worthwhile faith
um
it seems to me to take faith to operate
always when we don't know what we're
doing and we usually don't know what
we're doing and so part of the reason
that you have to have faith is because
you're actually ignorant
and it fills in the gaps right because
otherwise you'd be stuck with a
never-ending regress
you just ask why all the time and then
you could never act because the y has to
end somewhere and i think by virtually
by definition it ends with an act of
faith that might be akin to your idea
about faith being beyond reason it's
like well
look
if if i ask you why you're
having this conversation with me you'll
give me a reason
and if i ask you why
that reason is valid you'll give me
another reason and if i do that five or
six times you're going to run out of
reasons
and
but you're still having the conversation
so that means you have faith that the
conversation can go somewhere good and
that's not actually a delusion
no no and actually you're moving toward
god and i think that's a classic route
in our tradition
um and just the way you were doing it
why are we having this conversation i
give you know these particular reasons
but then ask the why again ask it a
third or fourth or fifth time finally
i'm going to get to something like well
because i want to be happy
you know
what ultimately motivates the will is
some desire for happiness what's
happiness
well keep pressing that question it
can't be something simply in this world
we all know that doesn't make us happy
in the way that we're seeking
it's something like the sumumbonum right
somewhat the ultimate good
i want to be happy in the fullest
possible sense all the time
which is why you know taylor de chardin
said this that i wouldn't get out of bed
in the morning unless i believed in god
and that's what he meant was if you do
that kind of horizon analysis of every
act of the will even the simplest like
getting out of bed you finally come to
the sumo bonum okay so let me walk
through that okay let me walk through
that because i think that that's a
useful thing to think about technically
i've thought about identity in this
regard because identity is a nested
structure yeah it's also a lens through
which we view the world
and so
if i'm sitting at my typewriter typing
you might ask me what i'm doing
and the answer is well i'm moving my
fingers up and down yeah but then that's
true and the next answer is well i'm i'm
producing words on a
page
but i'm also producing phrases
and i'm producing sentences and i'm
producing paragraphs and then chapters
and then a book and then you might say
well are you writing a book or are you
being a professor and i'd say no well
i'm i'm being a professor
pushing my fingers up and down on this
keypad and then you might say well what
is what's professor nested in and the
answer to that would be something like
well good citizen
and then that's nested in good man
and then that's nested in well then
that's right where you start to
encounter what i think are something
like religious presuppositions it's like
right well what exactly do you mean by
good man and i think i think
psychologically i think well that means
to act out the mythological hero
and that's exactly the point where that
identity touches on something that's i
think indistinguishable from religion at
that end now i'm not sure what that
means about god
per se
i would say this that god in our great
tradition could be defined
as the good in its unconditioned form
so all the things you've been you've
been raising here so the yyy i'm
answering with some kind of good with a
conditioned good the very fact that i
can put it in a wider context means it's
conditioned it's good i'm seeking it but
it's not the ultimate thing i'm seeking
so unless we have an infinite regress
which i think is repugnant to reason
and immobilizing you know there are
people who have neurological conditions
that put them into an infinite regress
and they cannot act
right
so if that's repugnant both let's say
epistemically and psychologically we
have to come to something
that's properly called the unconditioned
good
good in its absolute form that which is
is desirable simply for its own sake
so aquinas will say god is called good
because god is the supremely desirable
what do we desire thomas says some form
of actuality or being that's why we call
god the
fully real that which is most most uh
actual octaspuros right but i like the
analysis it comes not so much
cosmologically but psychologically from
what motivates me and finally unless my
life just sort of uh founders into
irrationality i am motivated by
ultimately oh my god right well i i
think so because
you know me i would also say well let's
let's let's reject that argument and say
well you're you're not nested in good
man good citizen hero and then beyond
that you know cosmic hero and i think
psychologically speaking the figure of
christ is if nothing else a cosmic hero
and and i'm not saying it it's nothing
else but it's it's at least that well
what would the alternative be well you
wouldn't be doing what was good well
then what's on the outskirts of your
value structure is something that's
adversarial something that's the
opposite of good and maybe maybe you're
likely in fact your psyche is not pure
and you
you know you
you you vary
depending on your
faith i suppose but but
but there's no escaping being nested in
some sort of transcendent structure like
that and then i think of it this way so
you have this outermost reach of your
identity structure which is something
like
whatever the idea of good man is
grounded in and i do think it's grounded
in this hero narrative but then i look
at the hero narrative and i think well
that's a biologically
uh that's an emergent
narrative it has evolutionary roots it's
something like
man has discovered that
his goal is to move into the unknown to
confront what's
what's predatory and and dangerous and
to garner something of great value in
return and to share it with the
community and it's an ancient ancient
story
it echoes through the old testament
continually um it's even there
it's even there it lurks underneath the
accounts of god's creation itself and
and and that that means that that
outermost rim of identity
is something that has an evolutionary
origin and then you think well that
means that it has to be connected it's
connected with reality in some
fundamental sense
does that
demonstrate the existence of god that's
a well that's a different question but
but you can push you can you can make a
logical case for the necessity of that
that hypothesis of goodness to that
point as far as i can tell stay with
first with your example of of someone
let's say it was really wicked and there
are wicked people
you know we can analyze that
psychologically or two of them are
sitting right here well yeah i mean
because it goes right through the human
heart uh as soon as said um but thomas
aquinas says a wicked person
even the most wicked person is seeking
at least the apparent good
so some something that appears good to
that person now they could be totally
mixed up about it it's not in fact good
for them but at least it appears good to
them so even the most wicked person
thomas says is
incoherently seeking god
because it's always some good and now
he's got
the wrong sense of it
but he's still being drawn and motivated
by this first cause of the will even the
most wicked person see but i think
that's a sign of hope that means grace
is always possible now read whether it's
dolcevsky or flannery o'connor and
people that talk about the most wicked
types but they're sometimes the place
where grace breaks through you know
because they are seeking god in their in
their perverse way
so in a way he's got us coming or going
you know i mean whether we're mother
teresa or we're
uh a a wicked dostoevsky character we're
all seeking god in some way
and i agree with you about the bible the
bible well i see i'm i'm not that
optimistic because i i think that
i think i don't think that
all evil actions are misguided
um
i think that
because
and i think that's best illustrated in
the story of cain and abel
and ike took the story of kane extremely
seriously i think it has unbelievable
explanatory power it's quite staggering
that the power of that story the
explanatory power especially for how
short it is
you know cain is resentful he has his
reasons his sacrifices were repudiated
by god for reasons that aren't made
clear in the text which is a great
ambiguity because often our sacrifices
are repudiated and cain is bitter and no
wonder and he has able around to rub his
nose in it as well but kane's reaction
is i'm going to destroy what god values
most
and that now you might say well kane is
conflicted and ambivalent about that and
i believe that but yeah but i don't
think he was seeking the good when he
killed when he struck down he was he was
he was shaking his fist at god yeah
indeed he was objectively but he was
seeking at least the apparent good for
him
in his twisted mind he thought that was
the good i don't believe it i don't
believe it i think you can get to a
point where you're so
resentful i really believe this that
you're so resentful that you will do
harm to yourself
as well as everyone else and actually
truly but a suicide is seeking at least
the apparent good
a suicidal person thinks my
non-existence is a good thing
so they are seeking the good but in a in
a twisted misguided way
um
and it's to me it's got metaphysical
roots because i would hold to the
classical view that that evil is a
provazzio bony right it's a privation of
the good so good is always more
fundamental than evil it has to be
they're not they're not co-equal
principles fighting away
so i i'd repudiate any sort of gnostic
or manichaean
system that metaphysically too i believe
that i thought about that a lot
jung is being accused of manichaeanism
for example because he took evil so
seriously
who he has sorry i couldn't carl you yes
yes
but
but but you know he took evil
extraordinarily seriously which is
something that's definitely worth doing
so look you look at examples like the
columbine killers
that well
you know
you could have the suicide could have
come before the murders
but it didn't
and so
i don't
i even see maybe in those situations the
desire for non-existence not so much as
a seeking of the good but a desire to
punish god for the inadequacy of his
creation yeah oh no it could be but but
at least in their mind that's a good
thing
so that's the cain connection that the
resentment against god and getting back
at god
sure i see it in the pastor life all the
time it's a justified thing they think
for them it is god deserves it because
look at what's happened
but see but god has his coming or going
because that that is in fact a quest for
god that's right i mean even even the
most uh resistant sinner is in fact
under grace in that sense that's why
i've always liked both origen and c.s
lewis say this that
it's the love of god that lights up the
fires of hell right if someone's in hell
it's it's the resistance to god's love
that's lighting up the fires it's
causing the friction
and so god has you coming or going i
mean is god present in hell sure because
whatever is has to be grounded in god
and god's even present in the fires of
hell because it's the resistance against
god that's causing them you know
so i i think uh
it's a metaphysical statement and a
psychological statement about the
primacy of the good but it's a source of
hope and a lot of my pastoral work you
know and you as a psychologist too when
you go into people's pain in a very deep
way
and priests go all the time to these
limit situations where people have lost
loved ones they're facing their own
death they're facing tremendous failure
that's where priests go
you know because that's often where
where grace is going to break through
well there are i've encountered
situations as a clinician yeah where
where religious language is the only
language that can be used to describe
what's happening that's quite
interesting it's difficult to relay
those experiences outside the specific
framework of the occurrences
yeah
i always think of you know hegel said to
noah limit as a limit is to be beyond
the limit and i think that's that's true
here so whether it's the physical
sciences or psychology our reason comes
to a certain limit but then it
recognizes the limit as a limit and
that's to be already beyond it in a way
and they often talk about religious
questions as limit questions or it's a
limit situation when i begin to ask the
meta question beyond questions or i come
to a meta experience beyond any ordinary
experience and that's why again priests
tend to show up at those limit cases
that's when we're looking into this
abyss and it is from our standpoint
rather abyssal i mean what is it that
stands beyond what i can know and
control
and there's this i mean do a kierkega
guardian there's a kind of leap that
that abyss is something
um loving
and what stands beyond what i can
control is a force of love that's
actually summoning me
and that's where i go back to what i
said about deus dixa god speaking
through the scriptures i think that's
what it means the voice from the cloud
is a symbol of it you know um when
someone hears the voice of god
it's coming from the abyss it always is
job you know the voice comes out of the
whirlwind so your your eyes are closed
and you know you can't see anything but
from the whirlwind comes the voice
because and again that
speech is so important because joe where
were you when i did all these i mean
what do you know about what's going on
you know nothing about what's going on
but from the abyss beyond reason comes
the voice and the bible witnesses to
that stuff all the time
and boy it happens in people's
experience i mean you and i both know
that when you you come up against limits
what comes out of the abyss is a very
interesting thing well one of the ways
that's interesting to think about this i
think is that
well
let's assume that at the outermost
limits of your identity
you don't make the assumption that
you're involved in an enterprise that's
good nested inside a being that's good
let's say you take the opposite approach
to that
what happens to your behavior and
what i
believe
i've observed and i tried to document
this particularly in my book maps of
meaning is that
you start acting in ways that make
everything worse very rapidly yes so
and that
and
so for i had a debate a while back with
a with an anti-natalist david benatar
and he
believes that existence is so
rife with suffering conscious existence
is so rife with suffering that it would
be better if it just didn't exist at all
so and
dostoevsky's ivan makes that case in the
brothers karamazov brilliantly
brilliantly he tortures his brother
eliosha who's the novitiate um and it's
a very interesting book because eliot is
nowhere near the
returration that ivan is but
he is the most admirable character in
the book because of the totality of his
personality not because of the
brilliance of his rational mind it's an
amazing book in in that regard
but
the problem i had with benatar's
hypothesis wasn't its
its axiom because i think you can
you can make a strong case that there's
so much suffering in the world that
um the question of its validity is a
valid question the problem for me there
is that if you do that and you start to
act that out um
things take up things appear to take a
vicious turn very rapidly you start
working against everything that's alive
and striving yes and
no quite right um gosh there's a lot
there i was thinking of as you were
talking the uh dante's image of satan at
the pit of hell not in a fiery place but
an icy place much much better symbol of
stuck surrounded by the betrayers
yeah to chewing on the three great
traitors but his great wings he's meant
to fly he's meant to fly up into the
into the presence of god but all they do
is he's beating his wings and that's our
earlier point about he's seeking god i
mean satan is seeking god you have to
that's the way the will functions but
all he's managing to do is make the
world around him colder so as he's
beating his wings he's just he's
creating the
meteorology of hell you know so that's
what happens when someone gets really
stuck they are in fact seeking god but
they and he cries from all six eyes he's
got six eyes and he's weeping and he's
drooling from the people he's chewing
and he's stuck and he's making the world
colder it's a beautiful picture of what
happens it's really useful too for for
listeners to realize you look if you
look at this is my opinion and you can
take it for what it's worth
um
the images of satan in
paradise lost and in dante's inferno are
unbelievably instructive if you all if
you start to understand that what these
thinkers were trying to do was to
produce an imaginative representation of
evil and evil as an embodied
and transcendent um being and uh and the
the psychological rationale for that i
believe and it has something to do with
our ability to communicate which you
referred to earlier is that
the evil we do
is informed by the entire human race's
conception of what constitutes evil
and and and stretching back from the
beginning of the time when we began to
communicate so for example you you see
this quite clearly i read the columbine
killer's notes in quite a bit of detail
and it's saturated with satanic thought
and the reason for that is that that
sort of thought is part of the culture
because we've come to represent these
transcendent figures of evil in poetry
and in movies and it happens all the
time in movies with characters say like
hannibal lecter and in horror movies and
um
the
the the milton's
satan who's often viewed at least by
some as a revolutionary hero
seems to me to be something like the
rational mind it's what happens to the
rational mind when it places its
presuppositions in the place of god that
because
satan
seems to presume that
he can replace the transcendent by his
own presuppositions
and i think that's
my reading of that is that's actually
what happened on earth
not long after milton wrote when these
totalitarian states emerged it's
something solzhenitsyn commented on it
where the presuppositions the utopian
presuppositions of man
rationally thought out
were seen as sufficient to to represent
everything the totality to eliminate the
need for something transcendent and the
consequence of that was that they
produced something that looked an awful
lot like hell hell and dante did that
more psychologically and so milton
milton being the great poetic genius
that he was had a poetic sense that that
was what was coming down the pipelines
do you i wonder if you read your
countrymen uh charles taylor much the
the canadian philosopher because
catholic too
taylor said that we in the west let's
say western europe america canada
australia
we might be the first civilization ever
ever
to think you can find real happiness
apart from a transcendent reference
point
and
everyone in human history has felt
something like
the alluring darkness beyond what i can
control and know is necessary a
relationship to that realm is necessary
for happiness we're the first culture
ever that said no i don't care i'm
indifferent to it
but that does produce versions of hell
for sure because something will take the
place
of of the transcendent point of
reference well it seems useful even even
from the perspective of humility i mean
i don't know if this is a reasonable
thing to say but
a tyrant who believes in god is likely
preferable to one who doesn't because at
least in principle tyrant is held
accountable by something that isn't him
that's right he even and and he would
get caught at least in principle again
in the operation of his own conscience
don't you i i love the fact in the
scriptures they're very unique this way
they do not apotheosize their leaders
and it's very different from so many
other ancient cultures where the kings
become like gods and there's the bible i
mean the bible is bluntly honest about
its leaders and his kings even the
greatest even david murderer adulterer
solomon saul
the whole realm of them that's a
brilliant insight of the bible that all
these people are under god and they're
under judgment
and that's a that's a liberating idea
and when we lose that the leaders do
become apotheosized well you saw that in
rome constantly in ancient rome that
literally happened
you know and there's always a proclivity
for that to happen that's the imperial
presidency you know
right and i think it's very important i
always tell when i when i'm preaching on
this subject to christians the fact that
jesus is called the son of god it was so
important because it was dethroning the
roman claim that the emperor
was the
austro you know so one of the titles
after julius caesar
is is divas he's he's divinized then his
son augustus becomes the son of the god
you know so when the the first
evangelists were saying i've got good
news about jesus the son of god they
were saying right it's not caesar he is
not the son of god this one whom caesar
killed by the way he's the son of god
but the bible's always making that move
of knocking our own pretensions off
their their pedestals i think that's an
amazing observation actually and it is
one of the things that
that that is
extraordinarily striking about the old
testament is that it's so sophisticated
psychologically because what's happening
there is that the idea of absolute
sovereignty is disconnected from the
person bearing the sovereignty and so at
the very least again speaking
psychologically what you have is
um the representation of god as that
which is sovereign
and
now each individual can be a
representative of that and can have that
operate within them but they aren't that
and that that that well as i said at the
least that's a brilliant psychological
innovation and the fact that the
biblical characters are so they're
realistic to the point of dostoevsky and
painfulness
you know abraham doesn't leave home till
he's what 80 he's 75.75 he's a slow he's
a late starter right by and and then his
life is just one god-awful catastrophe
after another for the first while it's
like you know
you have some contempt for him let's say
because he's hanging around his father's
tent and then he does finally pay
attention to the call of adventure to
god's voice and he goes out and
encounters tyranny and starvation and
corruption and yeah and he makes all
sorts of mistakes and you know and it's
easy to be contemptuous i think of the
biblical characters because of that but
it actually speaks to their intense
psychological realism and it's so useful
for for people to see that because
abraham for example is blessed by god
despite the fact despite despite his
evident character flaws and that's the
case for for for the patriarchs in
general and it is remarkable
right a descent of yours i'll put in the
throne that will last forever to david
who was a deeply flawed character what i
find cool is that even before you get to
the human characters go to the very
beginning of the bible and you have a
dethroning of the cosmic pretenders to
the absolute so in the creation account
you know sun moon stars planet animals
the earth itself all the things
mentioned were worshiped in different
contexts so the author is saying no no
no no they're not divine they're
creatures but then he turns it around
beautifully but they have a purpose
which is to give praise to god so
they're not god they should be dethroned
from that but now they're given the
privilege of praising god with their
manner of being led by the conscious
creature human beings who and catholics
know this whoever comes at the end of a
liturgical procession is the one that
leads the prayer
so
genesis the opening verses sound like a
liturgical procession you know the first
is then that evening came morning follow
then the fourth day and it's like a
steady procession of liturgical actors
the last figure the human being is the
one now that will lead the chorus of
praise
to my mind it's the master theme of the
whole bible if you want is we're rightly
constituted when we
give praise to god and can lead all of
our creaturely brothers and sisters in
the right praise of god sin is bad
praise from it's without fail in the
bible it's they went after false gods
they went after the gods of those people
they they abandoned the teaching of the
lord
bad praise
leads to the disintegration of the self
so that's now in the psychological order
that's really well praises praises what
what you praise is what you pursue
and so if you're pursuing the wrong
thing then you're going to fall apart
right
one of the great biblical ideas i think
is you become what you praise so what
gets your worth ship
that's the origin of our word there what
what's the highest worth for you
you become that you know so you become
what you worship you're meant to become
children of god
but what happens we end up worshiping
something so every one of us worships
something and we become conformed to
that
and then if it's not god we disintegrate
and then like satan we start beating our
wings and making the world around us
worse so that the world around us
disintegrates that's the bible the bible
tells that story over and over and over
again you know which is why you know
from a catholic perspective a christian
perspective
that jesus on the cross
is offering the father right praise on
our behalf
and see now you're getting to the mass
which is very powerful you know that
the mass is the great act of praise
where we join ourselves to the sacrifice
of the son we say
we we conform ourselves to christ i have
to ask you about that because it's just
burning a hole in me well i'm in chronic
pain
a lot of it and it's constant
and
i'm not i don't know what to do with it
generally speaking i know things that
make it worse you said something a lot
of ideas were flashing through my mind
and i want to i want to hit at it
because it's a crucial concern
you said something so surprising that
christ on the cross was offering up the
proper praise to god it's like well i'm
not going to just let you say that
without noticing it because that's a
hell of a thing to say so i'm going to
put together some things that you
touched on and and then we can address
this so
you said in the bible one of the things
that's remarkable about it is the
conception of the divine so the
conception of what is of highest worth
is stripped from some of its
obvious objects of projection the sun
the moon the cosmos the stars um but
then also
earthly leaders of other cultures idols
and also earthly leaders of your own
culture says no whatever the ultimate
divine is it's not to be found in its
fullest expression in any of those
examples it's something else okay so
then the question is well what is that
else well the christian answer is well
whatever it is for in its human form
let's say it's something human
it's something that humans can aspire to
it's both of those
and and and it's made manifest in the
figure of christ
something specifically human but then
you have this terrible paradox with
christ which is partly the paradox that
you just laid out which is a very
difficult thing to
get a grip on
so what is it exact why is what christ
is doing proper sacrifice is it because
it is what is it his willingness to bear
the pain what is it
yeah that's close to it so we say the
word became flesh
so the the word who is always in the
presence of the father so the word
doesn't worship the father because the
word is god so
we shouldn't talk about worship within
the trinity itself but now the word
becomes flesh because the father god so
loved the world he sent his only son
that all who believe in him might have
eternal life in his name
he sends the son into flesh
but into flesh that's been so
compromised by sin so not into a
pristine creation
now what do you have that's an
interesting question theologically what
do you have sent the sun if creation had
not fallen that's an interesting
question right in fact it did the
valuable fall that laid the yeah the
cool part right yes it's a remarkable
idea it is indeed but like don scotus
argued you know the franciscan medieval
theologian that god would have sent his
son even if we hadn't sent but that's
another question okay so let's take that
apart for just a sec so that people are
clear about it so the theory here is
that
there is something wrong with the
structure of creation that that's its
steepness and sin and everyone has to
ask if they believe that and and it
seems to me that people do is there's a
sense that things aren't how they should
be that we're not how we could be that
something
has gone astray and is continuing to go
astray which is a mystery in and of
itself if it's a god-created world it's
like why is that precisely
well i mean the quick answer is is
corrupted freedom you know or a
misguided freedom you might say but
the word comes into flesh into fallen
flesh
and the cross is what the cross is
cruelty and hatred and violence and
institutional injustice and stupidity
and
you know if you read the the passion
narratives it's it's a beautiful
sort of poetic presentation of all
that's wrong with us that comes out to
meet him
and bearing all of that
he continues in his relationship of of
obedience and unity with the father
so
bearing the sins of the world bearing
all the dysfunction and twisted quality
of the world he brings us
back online
so in in the attitude of the word made
flesh on the cross we see a sinful
corrupt
hate-filled world now brought painfully
back online
that's the sacrifice of the cross that's
pleasing to the father so we should
never play the game of well the father
is like a is a dysfunctional alcoholic
father that you know is now demanding
this blood sacrifice
it's it's rather the father is pleased
by the son's entry into our fallen
situation
and his bearing of all that dysfunction
even as he brings us
back online to the father okay so why
does okay so
let's say
christ maintains his i know this isn't
exactly the right way of thinking about
it but it'll work for rhetorical
purposes i think
it's so christ is tortured
by betrayal by by by physically
and spiritually as well because the best
way to torment someone is when is to
punish them despite their innocence
right yeah so right right or maybe worse
than that to punish them because of
their virtues that's even better and so
that's
that's intrinsic in this story as well
christ bears up under that
he doesn't repudiate god or doesn't
repudiate his own essence it's something
like that he but
then what
is the is the example of that is the
example of bearing up under that
exceptional duress and maintaining a
moral stance is that the example that
redeems the world is it that if you do
that
in your own life the world is de facto
redeemed
it is that but more because if it's just
that then a pelagian system would be
true that we just need a good you know
moral exemplar
it's something more
than it's just merely good i mean it's
super human what's being asked for
no true but it's something more
metaphysical about it
it's a reworking of the way things are
if if jesus takes upon himself all the
dysfunction of the world
and swallows it up in the ever greater
divine mercy so it's it's christ bearing
all of our dysfunction but transfiguring
it in his great act of of forgiveness
and obedience to the father that i think
all of that coming together
simultaneously is the sacrifice that's
pleasing to the father
in some ways the word from the cross
father forgive them they know not what
they do is that is the most important
or or play with this to jordan that
after the resurrection
so jesus comes back precisely to those
who had denied him and betrayed him and
and run from him in his moment of
greatest need and in almost any telling
of a similar story if that all happened
and then the person who had died is back
from the dead and he appears to those
who had abandoned him you'd expect him
to you know wreak havoc on them right
so jesus
shows his wounds to be sure because the
wounds of jesus are a sign of the
world's dysfunction
if i'm ever tempted you know when we
were younger the book um
i'm okay your okay came out right
so we're always tempted to say well
basically we're okay you just need a
little fixing up around the edges
whenever we're tempted to say that it's
the wounds of jesus that say otherwise
that's why i was insisting earlier that
i don't you know that that it isn't
merely misguided good that turns people
towards the darkness it's it's it's
voluntary desire to produce the darkness
as well anyways
i do take that very seriously and it's
an interesting idea is that the ideal is
wounded in proportion to the degree that
everything has deteriorated away from
the ideal and that's almost by
definition true
right yeah
yeah no that's true but it's just the if
the very act of the will itself is
structured in such a way it has to be
seeking some kind of at least apparent
good but that's our earlier issue um
so the wounds show the dysfunction of
the world which the son of god took upon
himself but then then
the word of shalom which is in all the
resurrection accounts that jesus says
peace
so
when when paul for example says i'm
certain that neither death nor life nor
angels or principalities nor heighten or
death nor any other creature could ever
separate us from the love of god
how does he know that because
we killed god
and he returned with the word of
forgiveness
so so that means it's like
it's it's like for the divine goodness
and forgiveness
can trump any evil
even the evil of killing god
so
we killed him but yet he returned in
forgiving love i think that's the moment
when christianity is born
in the dual sense of yes we kill them
look at the wounds
but he says shalom to us nevertheless
so that i i can't run away from him
i can try you know that's what all the
sinners do i can try but ultimately the
divine love is such that it's it's
greater
that's why paul can all say we're sin
abounds
grace abounds the more that's
christianity so the greatest sin we kill
the son of god there's no greater sin
than that
where sin abounds grace abounds the more
and see all of that was made possible in
a way by the great sacrifice of the
cross which is why it's a saving act
um now that's i'm i'm
striving to understand person okay so i
want to ask you a bunch of questions
about that so we talked a little bit
before about the church bleeding its
people they're leaving the young people
are leaving and my sense of that is it's
because the church does not demand
enough of its
of of the young of young people yeah i
think it doesn't demand enough and by
not demanding enough it doesn't indicate
its faith in their possibility and yeah
so now in orthodox christianity as i
understand it there seems to me to be
more emphasis on the idea that it's each
human's obligation to become like christ
that's the goal well that's that's that
by definition we could say and we could
speak psychologically about this as well
that means to become the ideal
the ideal that's beyond rationality even
that's what you're aiming at that's
what's hypothetically within your grasp
for
and it seems to me as well that that's
what the mass symbolizes is that
and i'd be happy to have
any objections to this i would be happy
to hear
the the incorporation of the host is the
is the embodiment it's the incarnation
of christ within that's what it's acting
out that's the idea i mean in some sense
it's it's the consumption of the saving
element but the saving element is
actually a mode of being and this isn't
hit home it's like look what the
church the church demands everything of
you yeah absolutely everything and
then the reason that that people are
leaving is because
that adventure isn't being put before
them it's like look you can have your
cars and your money and all of that but
that's nothing compared to the adventure
that you could be going on
yes i
i wish you'd preach to our people
because i think you're absolutely right
about that uh
the language we'd use is um be a saint
that's what that's the ordinary goal of
every baptized person is to be a saint a
saint means someone who's holy or
utterly conformed to christ now press
that to be conformed to christ means
you're willing to go
into the dysfunction of the world to
bear its pain
and to bear to it the ever greater
divine mercy and love now fill in the
blank francis of assisi mother teresa
may be in our time like when we were
younger if someone said well who's a
living saint we all would have said
mother teresa well what did she do
she went into the worst slum in the
world i'd been there
and she bore the suffering of of of the
world
literally picking up the dying and and
bearing their disease and bearing their
psychological suffering and
and she she took on herself the wounds
of jesus
but then think about you know the smile
of mother teresa she brought to that
place the ever greater more super
abundant mercy of christ that's being a
saint and you're dead right
i think we're not sufficiently calling
our people to that okay i can tell you
one thing i've experienced and this is
this is really something to see
i spoke in about 150 cities sequentially
with a day or two in between and
to large audiences three to ten thousand
all the time something like that
and
i always paid attention to the audience
singly because i was always talking to
one person at a time but also
on mass you know to see to hear
because if if the words are in landing
in the right place and hypothetically
emanating from the proper source then
there's silence
and sometimes that silence can be
dramatic and that's why people say well
you could have heard a pin drop it's no
one's moving because their attention is
100 percent gripped by whatever just
happened and one thing that reliably
elicited that was the proposition that
the meaning that sustains you and
protects you from corruption during
suffering is to be found in
responsibility
and people that and i thought i thought
part of the reason that that produced
silence was because no one says that now
they say happiness or they say rights or
they say privileges or or or they say
reward or something like that they don't
say
pick up the heaviest load you can care
and carry and care for that matter and
stumble forward and i've seen people cut
those ideas and put them on t-shirts and
and play with them and and so
it's not that the church is asking too
little of its people
no i i it is asking too little of them i
i quite agree
it's precisely and so there's no heroism
in it
and yeah there's no call it to well
because and because finally i call it
the culture of self-invention is a very
boring culture stanley howard was a
methodist theologian who said he defined
liberalism or you know the modern
attitude
as i have no story except the story i
invent for myself and that's finally a
very boring place to live it seems to me
that in fact you're part of this
incredibly rich and complex narrative
which i would refer to as god's creation
and god's providential movement but i go
back to luke's gospel you know when
jesus says to them
duke and ultim is at the latin go out
into the depths
you people have been horsing around in
the shallows way too long that's where
the fish are by the way but also it's
where adventure is it's where that was
where the glory of life is
get out into the depth
and we have i think allowed our people
to be kind of horsing around by the
seashore all the time it's also shallow
it's also where what protects you from
hell is
because you you need to be engaged in
something that's deeply meaningful
enough to justify the suffering
and and and so you know part of what
happens in the story of christ is the
only thing deep enough to justify that
level of suffering is
absolute immersion in a cosmic drama
and then you ask yourself well are we
each
are we each emerged immersed in a cosmic
drama and it's all it's not so easy to
say no to that it's a life or death
situation
and everything's in it
well and i would say the the instinct of
a christian is to go where the suffering
is so i spent a lot of my life forming
priests so working in the seminary
eventually i was the rector of the
seminary so my job was to help these
young guys discern the priesthood and i
would say that's that's the
the test i mean do you do you have an
instinct to go where the pain is to go
where the suffering is if you want to
live a comfortable life then don't
become a priest you might be a bad
priest you know if you embrace a
comfortable life but it's the mother
teresa model it's the duke and ultim go
out into the depths and the depths mean
the depth of of human suffering
with what you guys are doing why isn't
it working well what's what's our
problem it's true that we're not doing
enough of that and i do think we've
succumbed a bit to the modern thing
which is a preoccupation with rights and
freedom and my individuality and so on
but you see this with church activism so
much now is that so much so like the
church seems to be replacing itself in
some sense with social activism it's
like we've got enough social activists
yes well but i'd say this
pope benedict xvi was a great
intellectual hero of mine said the
church always does three essential
things
the church worships god
it evangelizes and it cares for the poor
poor broadly construed as i say anyone
who's suffering right but that first
move as we said earlier is indispensable
the church worships god it teaches the
world right praise because without right
praise the whole thing falls apart
secondly it evangelizes what's that well
that's a cool thing too because
uwangelion in greek good news
they were playing with that because the
the romans would have used that in the
eastern part of the empire
to announce an imperial victory they
would send an evangelist ahead with the
good news um hey caesar won a victory so
these very edgy first christians who had
zero social status no power no military
behind them said oh no no i got the true
ewan guelion it's about jesus risen from
the dead who was put to death by caesar
but whom god raised
so that's the proclamation of the good
news that now we have hope now the
sacrifice has been made and god's love
is greater than anything that's in the
world okay now i got those two things in
place
now serve the poor now go where the pain
is go where the suffering is but if you
divorce them from each other and that
that has happened so who cares about
worship and that's fussing around with
altars and sacristies and who cares
about evangelization let's just get down
and serve the poor then it does devolve
simply into social work right but if the
three are together worship god
evangelize the dying and rising of jesus
and serve the poor
now the church is is cooking you know
all right so let's let's look at the
second one of those so yeah you know it
seems to me i i can understand this not
that whether i can understand it or not
is a hallmark of its validity but i have
to try to understand what i can
understand
i can understand the idea that bearing
forward in a moral direction acting as
if
being is intrinsically good and that hum
that humanity as part of that is also
intrinsically good
bearing up under
bearing all that up as a set of
propositions even in the most extreme
cases of suffering i can see that as a
valid moral good that's that's christ's
refusal to be
um
what would you say corrupted by the
injustice of his and and terror of his
fate
and so that might be something like
you don't have the right to become a
tyrant no matter how badly you were
tyrannized let's say yeah and i think
that's an unshakable moral proposition
um
but then there's the resurrection
element of it because i could say well
the first thing i would say is well i
kind of understand that psychologically
parts of us die and
and they have to die because they're in
error they have to be cast off and we're
reborn constantly as a consequence of
our movement our ascent forward there's
no movement forward without some death
of the past
and so i can see the resurrection idea
as a
metaphor for the part of us that
continues onward despite our failures
and constantly reconstitutes our spirit
it's not something trivial
but then there's the insistence on in
the church of the bodily resurrection
which is well
let's call that a stumbling block to
modern belief no no doubt about that
that's something more than mere metaphor
and so you might ask well why is it
insisted upon why isn't the proposition
that
you you have a transcendent moral
obligation to bear to to to operate for
the good of all things regardless of
your suffering
a hard line
no justification with um the defeat of
death
necessitated i'm not trying to make a
fundamental critique of the idea of the
resurrection because i know there are
things that i don't know i i know that
for sure
and god only knows how the world is
fundamentally structured but
but it seems and this is a nietzschean
criticism in some sense tuna freudian
criticism it's
that seems in in some real sense too
good to be true
yeah so
and and so what do you make of the what
do you make of the resurrection how do
you conceptualize it even as it's
related in the gospels
yeah good you're raising a lot of
interesting things first of all
everything you said about it in terms of
psychological um archetypes and
metaphors good fine i think those are
legitimate i think those are
our correct perceptions of things and it
has indeed functioned that way in a lot
of the literature of the world
resurrection type stories
but i think what's really interesting
about the new testament
as as lewis said you know c.s lewis when
someone said well
the new testament is just another
iteration of the ancient myth and he
said anyone that says that has not read
many myths because there's something so
distinctive about the new testament and
what i i would say jordan first this
i think from the first page of matthew
through revelation
what you get throughout is this what i
call this grab you by the shoulders
quality
they knew about literature that is
conveying deep psychological and
philosophical truth you know paul
certainly knew that literature very well
um
it doesn't sound like that though
it has overtones with it it bears some
of that it has family resemblances with
it
but
what what you find on every page
is this
one galleon this good news so everything
you said is true i think it is true
but it's not exactly news it's part of
the philosophy of perennis that's been
around for a long time and a lot of the
great thinkers of the world and again i
agree with it i like the philosophy
apprentice
but the new testament
is people
who grabbed everyone they met by the
shoulders to say
something happened something's happened
here that we were not expecting that was
not part of our of our thought system
and it's so shaken us up
that we feel obligated to go careering
around the world and indeed to our
deaths
announcing it and defending it
and what it was was the fact
here in the in the 10th chapter of acts
of the apostles uh
this sort of almost tossed offline
we who ate and drank with him
after his resurrection from the dead
um
i don't think people trading in mythic
talk
use that kind of language mythic
language again i say it with high praise
i love the myths uh but you know once
upon a time and or in a galaxy far far
away and then a mythic story unfolds
but you read the acts of the apostles do
you hear about what happened it was
versus up in galilee and then in judea
you know those people john the bat
remember john the baptist well and then
this jesus and then in jerusalem and
then
we who ate and drank with him after his
resurrection from the dead
it's that's what and then look at paul
paul who saw him on the road to damascus
now the paul line letters man they do
not read like myths they just don't and
i love the myths i love the philosophy
apprentice but it doesn't read like that
it reads like someone who is has been so
bowled over by something and he wants
you to know about it and it's changed
everything
and i think what it was was what we said
earlier it's
okay now now we know
god's mercy
and love is greater than anything we can
possibly do why because we killed god
and that's why paul will say i'm going
to hold up one thing to you christ and
him crucified and crucified i mean it
was the most horrific thing they could
imagine in the ancient world it was
deeply embarrassing even to talk about a
crucifixion paul says no no let me put
it right in your face see
the author of life came and we killed
him but i got the good news who won
gilean
is god's mercy and love is is
greater because he brought this jesus
back from the dead well you do have a
you do have
the following argument which is that it
isn't clear which is harder to believe
whether that happened or whether people
made it up
because if they made it up that was
really something and that that does
strike me quite frequently reading the
new testament there are there are lines
in there that hit so hard you think
hmm it isn't obvious to me how someone
could have just thought that up
so and there is that well and young carl
jung
who i greatly admire you know he
believed i think in the same way that
c.s lewis did that and he doesn't talk
about this that much but that there is
this archetypal mythological pattern of
the dying and resurrecting hero that has
this psychological reality which is
extraordinarily deep yeah but that that
archetype was realized once in history
and that's the fully realized so it it
it came from the
the mythic realm let's say the realm of
eternal truth the realm of pattern
instinctive pattern for that matter and
was fully realized at one point in
history and you might think well if it's
going to be fully realized it has to
start somewhere
you know it can't start everywhere at
the same time or right
right what does an archetype look like
when it takes flesh
might be a way to get out well well and
and the thing is we we do see this and
it does grip us because
movies like we see representations of
this all the time
in
in my new book i talk a fair bit about
harry potter
and
you know harry potter is definitely an
archetype taking christ's figure taken
flesh well clearly he's in battle with
satan himself obviously i mean and and
she has an unbelievably profound
mythological imagination and the thing
that's so fascinating about all of that
is that because her
mythological imagination is spot on she
captivated the entire globe and and
produced you know this immense
storehouse of wealth and dominated the
entertainment landscape for a decade and
you know people don't take that
seriously but it's a it's a great
mystery to watch that
absolutely they should it's it's a it's
a phenom you know anything that grips
people's attention like that is
obviously worth paying attention to but
you know
so you know emery lewis called them good
dreams right so all the sort of
archetypal anticipations of the gospel
the good dreams of the race
or do you think jungian i love young too
but what happens if that archetype of
the person perfectly pleasing to god you
know kant's language
what would happen if that archetype
became flesh and indeed that's how they
put it the word became flesh and dwelt
among them i think that's also the
question we should each be asking
ourselves
in our own lives yeah it's like well who
could we be
and you say well you don't have to ask
yourself that question it's like well
good luck with your conscience then
you should be another christ that's the
objection to the self-created person
it's like yeah
the the idea that you can create your
own values is well good luck right try
good luck with that project yeah good
luck it's not it's not going to work
you know newman referred to the
conscience i always loved this as the
aboriginal vicar of christ in the soul
so he took the language descriptive of
the pope you know the vicar of christ
but he said the aboriginal vicar of
christ which is the conscience john
henry newman okay because oh i was
thinking of eric neumann so no john
henry newman and i it's it's a beautiful
way of describing it because we'd say
the christ dwelling within you
is the voice of the conscience that's
calling you to
sanctity ultimately to heroic
self-sacrifice to being who christ is it
also is it is what people worship
because
here's a way of thinking about it
technically well look when i have a
conversation with you
there's something i want from you i want
i want everything you can give me i want
you to be as
as as as there as you can possibly be
that's what i'm demanding all the time
if my attention
assuming a
properly constituted subjectivity if my
attention wanders
that means you're not delivering and so
if you're wandering around and
everyone's attention is wandering away
from you you're not delivering and
conscience
because we're so social we're social
creatures to the final degree conscience
tells you when you deviate from the
ideal and that ideal is what people
worship they by attending to that
manifestation of the ideal in you
they worship it
and so that's there
it's there in the
in the demands that we can't help but
make of each other and of ourselves
there's no escape from that
and so i i do think it's a perfectly
good question
what would happen
and this is the right question for your
life what would happen if you took that
seriously and so again what i see is
that it doesn't seem to me to be
if the church can no longer attract
young people it has to be
that they're not taking that with
sufficient seriousness
now yeah i think there's a lot to that i
don't want to externalize the blame it's
like i know the church is a human
organization and all of that and but but
it's still evidence
when i was coming of age so back in like
the 1970s
the presumption of the church was we
should make this thing as easy as
possible because if we make it hard
these people are going to run away so we
don't want make it we want to make it
intellectually easy so i got a very dumb
down catholicism it was through the
grace of god that i discovered later in
life the very rich catholic intellectual
tradition but i was going through school
including through high school
you know banners and balloons and
collages and it was very superficial we
got the clearer impression when i was a
kid that english and science and math
and all that were serious subjects
religion was like
religion was like gym or it was like you
know
i don't know what else like art class or
something it was considered not that
serious
so we dumbed it down intellectually and
we lessened the moral demand for sure
because we didn't want i think people to
run away and then
you know i'll say it bluntly rather
pathetically we tried to be as relevant
as possible that was the term from our
time
right and that's like the uncool guy at
the party man right you know if you have
to strive to be relevant you're you're
you're not
you're not on the cutting edge that's
for sure right and so
there's a study i read some years ago
that i thought was very plausible the
conclusion was what young people find
compelling in a mentor figure are the
two things one is that the person knows
a lot about the subject that he or she
is sharing and secondly they're really
committed to it
and when the kids sense those two things
there's a lot to know here and this guy
or this woman they really they really
believe it they find that compelling you
don't need you know the the games of
relevance you don't need to dumb it down
in fact smarten it up and and make it as
intellectually challenging and morally
challenging as possible um we dropped a
lot of practices that were that were
much more common years ago you know to
kind of draw young people into the
challenge of it so that is a problem
absolutely well you know one of the
things that i've been so delighted by is
my observation that there's a tremendous
hunger for serious conversation
yeah in public hunger for it and when i
when i
have engaged in my lectures
i'm always extending my myself to my
limits of thought like that's what the
lecture is it's an it's an attempt to go
past what i think and
there's absolutely no doubt that
that
um
everyone in the audience is on board
with that i mean it was the case when i
debated sam harris for example that
discussion which you know was as
technically complex as sam and i could
make it and you know and that might not
be as philosophically complex as the
absolute ideal but it was it wasn't
dumbed down by any stretch of the
imagination and
there there's just there was there's no
reason that that
is if you spoon feed that material
it
it catches no one what and i can tell
you this those new uh atheists so sam
and and uh
hitchens and dawkins those guys
uh they were good evangelizers i mean
for their position
uh i deal with yeah and they didn't dumb
it down either they didn't dumb it down
they had the two things i talked about
they were they were intelligent and they
were passionately committed to it but
every day on the internet when i go into
these comm boxes i hear the
phraseologies from hitchens and dawkins
and sam harris a lot of young people
read them
they didn't hug them into atheism they
argued them into atheism so i've been
telling our people we got to stop trying
to hug people back into the faith we
have to argue them back in the faith we
have to make it compelling and i had a
world challenge i've been walking with
this friend of mine
on talking with him and you know he said
something quite interesting um he was
raised in a communist country and was an
atheist after that um
he said
his family
observed christmas
and he criticized them for that because
it was logically incoherent
and then he realized that
all that would happen if they abandoned
christmas was that they wouldn't have
christmas anymore
it wasn't like he had something to
replace it with right and so it's
magical you might even call it naive if
if you're of the sort of mind that would
call that naive but do you want to have
it or not and if the answer is well i'll
replace it with another weekend
then that's really not helpful and the
problem with the atheists is that they
don't have
the best they can offer is something
like a materialistic utopia i've got
nothing against that like i've been
talking to people like bjorn lomberg and
and uh who who
who lay out this
vision of an increasingly wealthy world
where absolute poverty is a thing of the
past and where
people can take the levels of health
that are more or less taken for granted
in the west for granted everywhere in
the world through a process of
incremental economic improvement and
you know more power to that i think yeah
but i also know that
that that isn't a sufficient story is
and there's a kind of despair that goes
along with material security because the
adventure is drained out of it and
dostoevsky touches on this and this is
where i really learned this when i first
encountered this idea you know
dostoevsky in notes from under the
ground underground
says
look this is something you have to
understand
if you gave people everything they need
so that they had nothing to do but eat
cakes and
and busy themselves with the
continuation of the species if if they
were so happy that nothing but bubbles
of bliss would appear on the surface of
the water that they were in
they would smash it all to pieces just
so that something adventurous and unique
could happen and so like there has to be
a call
to a higher order of spiritual being
let's say a psychological being that
accompanies that materialism or it's or
we won't even kill us no absolutely
it'll kill it'll smother us um it's got
to be the call to sanctity and the call
of sanctity is a call to love uh and
they're dostoevsky you know
love is harsh and dreadful it's not a
cute little emotion or it's not a it's
not a sentiment
real love is harsh and dreadful because
it means going into the place where
people are suffering and becoming
another christ and bearing the burdens
of the world
that's serious business love is is and
something awful about it you know but
when you someone says there's also
something awful about the judgment you
know because if you love someone you
also hold them to a standard yeah you
will they're good right and that means
holding to a standard do you know this
russia triggers my mind i'm reading the
these wonderful books by this uh priest
walter chizak i kind of know that name
he died in 1984 but for 23 years he was
a prisoner in
the soviet system so he was arrested in
1939 right when the war got going with
the germans and make a long story short
he was in lubianca prison for five years
in moscow basically in solitary
confinement then he was sent for 15
years or so to siberia to the worst work
camps you know and he describes it in
this book called with god in russia
in this kind of
bold just straightforward way
but all through it
he says okay i went into russian to be a
missionary to announce the gospel it's
it's not the way i expected it to be i
didn't expect to be in a prison camp but
okay
this is what god has willed obviously at
least his permissive will is that i be
here so i'll do what i can so for 23
years this man
set up when he was in solitary a jesuit
program of prayer and he would go
through his day he had the prayers of
the mass memorized then when he gets to
the camps they would smuggle in little
bits of bread and wine so he would say
mass on a little table clandestinely you
know and he would minister in his own
quiet way
to the people around him
i'm telling that story because
in the most horrific circumstances in a
way he never saw coming he said okay but
i'll try to be a saint here i'll try to
be christ
bear the sufferings of those around me
and bring the grace of god
he was finally sprung in 1963 jfk was
involved in getting him out with a
prisoner exchange
as he left russia
he's the plane's taking off and he
did the sign of the cross over the
country bless the country and it's
incredibly moving story because it's not
at all flashy it's told in a really
almost bland manner but it's someone who
decided no
i'm going to go in the depths i'm going
to deal with what i've been given and
it's horrific i'm in a i'm in a soviet
siberian concentration camp doing hard
labor
but i'll be christ for the people here
um
that's it i mean that's the adventure
there's the hero's journey that he went
on so well so let's get back to the to
the resurrection idea there because
again see that story to some degree
doesn't require
the resurrection to to to to to to
underscore his heroism in fact to say in
some sense to say well that was
motivated by faith in the resurrection
in some sense undermines the heroism of
the action and again i'm saying i'm not
trying to casually dispense with the
idea of the resurrection at
not least because of its undoubted
metaphorical re structure and
but
there is this this
crazy emphasis this crazy idea that
somehow bearing up under all that burden
reformatted the entire structure of
being and that's associated with i
believe
and i'm no theologian i believe that's
associated with the idea of the
harrowing of hell
is that is that
well yeah there's something but i do as
a first step though that's the church
the church
christ's resurrection is the seed from
which the church grows and the church is
the means by which god wants to
reconfigure the world that's right we're
not there just to kind of whisper our
convictions among ourselves our whole
purpose is to go now and and recreate
the world
that's the church's purpose
it reminds me
i read history and history is so
interesting that it's unbearable right
if you read history it's it's unbearably
interesting and yet if you go sit in a
history class
taught by the typical history teacher
it's so dull that you can hardly keep
your eyes open and there's you know you
need to memorize what happened in 1612
and that's not the point the point is
the unbelievably magnificent drama and
so then again
if that story that that the church is
telling is not being taken up it's not
being sold there's something about it
that's not being sold properly i'm not
saying you have the answer to that's
true but
like i saw this kid once when i was in
montreal and he was about 17 years old
and he was big guy big like six foot
five guy and and uh you know like a
physical specimen
and he was standing on the corner of of
a like a shopping area and he had two
pink shopping bags in his hands and he
looked kind of bereft and i thought you
know if you came up to him and said um
i've got some heroism in battle for you
around the corner he dropped though and
you said it right he dropped those damn
pink shopping bags in a second and be
off for the adventure of his life
yeah
and and
you you it it has to what is it is it a
lack of faith that
a fundamental faith that that is sapping
the lifeblood out of that story because
you're saying well here i'm calling you
to an adventure that's as great as any
adventure you could possibly conceive by
definition this is the ultimate
adventure that you're being called to
yeah but but the hobbit hole is so
attractive i mean there's so
billboard would rather stay in his
hobbit hole i mean it's comfortable and
i got my doilies and it's nice it's
comfortable here so gandolf has to
summon him to adventure it's a it's a
it's a burden it's a task you know and
so the church has got to play that role
of of gandalf to get into these hobbit
holes and get people motivated to get
them out you know it wasn't walter
cheese like i'll tell exactly he's a
jesuit novice in pennsylvania
1930-something
and pope pius xi at the time from rome
says
russia's just gone communist the church
is being persecuted i need
and he said it this way i need uh heroes
to go into russia and you jesuits you're
kind of my shock troops i'm going to
summon you into russia and young walter
cheesex 18 or 19 says
he just knew
that's where i'm going and he went up to
the speaker and said i'm in
okay they sent him to rome to study
russian language and russian liturgy and
they sent him into russia so i mean he
was summoned he was summoned to
adventure and he took it you're in
why like what happened in your life to
to pull you in this direction and and
and and how has it worked for you
you know what was jordan for me uh i was
a catholic kid you know going to mass on
sunday
but not all that interested in religion
and i was interested in baseball when i
was like 13 14. but i'm in high school
freshman high school class and it was a
catholic high school so it's a religion
class
and one of the teachers laid out for us
one of thomas aquinas's famous arguments
for god's existence and i did not
disbelieve in god and i believed in god
but i never in my life thought
that you could think about god in a
serious way
and it opened up something it set my
mind on fire
and
i started going to libraries back in
those days we went to libraries and i
was taking these books of thomas aquinas
off the shelf i had no idea what i was
reading but but i was i i still to this
day
think of those like magical days that i
discovered something that just turned my
my mind on you know
so that was the opening of the door
then the other book i read at that time
that was so influential was thomas
merton you know merton the he's a
trappist monk he'd been a man of the
world you know all the way and then had
this huge conversion experience and
becomes the most radical kind of monk
you you can become
and those two thomas's aquinas and
merton had a big impact on me when i was
a
kid
because there's something romantic about
it you know mertens was the story of
someone kind of falling in love with god
totally um that's what got me in the
door
and then i followed a lot of the
intellectual path i was always kind of a
thinker type
and that got me into the priesthood and
then you know off i go but at every
stage it was something like a summoning
to
mission is language we would use
summoning to a mission a ever greater
kind of mission that kept me going
i always found it
i don't know the most compelling option
on the table it always struck me that
way is you look at the options of life
like well serving god yeah duh wouldn't
that be the most exciting thing is
that's it is that apart from the terror
that that might reasonably evoke it's it
is the best by definition and again you
could just speak psychologically here by
definition that's the best game you can
play
that's how it struck me when i was a kid
yeah
well it's almost a tautology you know
right it struck me that way you know so
it and i understand everyone's different
everyone's path is different but that's
how it struck me how grace i would say
you know entered my life and i truly
i've been a priest now for 30 what five
years
um bishop now for five years um
i i've i've never been
i've never been unhappy as a priest i
mean i've suffered certainly and have
gone through difficult times i've never
been unhappy though as a priest i've
never been tempted to leave
never felt like oh god why did i do that
i've never felt that um
and this social media enterprise of
yours you know i when i introduced you i
noted that you're perhaps the most
well-known catholic speaker in social
media circles i think that's a
reasonable presupposition do you have
competitors so to speak oh yeah there
are some people i was one of the
pioneers in a way because
i know like when youtube first got
started was 2006
by early 2007
i did a review of um scorsese's movie
that departed because my instinct was
let's talk about the culture let's talk
about things going on that have a
religious overtone you know so i started
early 2007 right when youtube got off
the ground
and then everything else facebook and
instagram came along and then others
sort of saw what i was doing and got
into the game too but i guess i was one
of the first ones to do it not that i
know that world that well i got all
these young people that helped me
navigate that world but i've been
providing a lot of the content and and
so what's what's that been like and how
is that received by your peers or your
superiors for that matter
i i would say well to answer the second
part first i think well i think they saw
oh yeah this is good i'm glad he's doing
it i'm glad someone has taken the
initiative and they began asking me
early on like hey tell us more about
this and how are you doing it and what
are the pitfalls and how's it working so
i think my superiors have always been
you know very open to it interested in
it when i've spoken to the now that i'm
a bishop i'll speak at the bishops
conference meetings about it and there's
always tremendous interest now these are
all older men for the most part they
don't know you know facebook from
you know french fries but um
they get it they get the importance of
it and and why it's worth doing
um and and the
the success of it in a way has been a
source of of surprise and delight to me
when i started
youtube videos i mean
we thought if we got 300 views we're
doing great i was thrilled when i my
first one got the 300 views
um
you know and then it just grew it just
grew from there and i think it was a
willingness to talk about the culture
and then
engage people so i can't do it as much
now but in the early days i would get in
the comm boxes and i would really enter
into these debates and you know as you
know
97 of people that come on com boxes are
mad at you for some reason or they you
know don't like what you're saying so
okay i was able then to at least have an
argument i could get into the you know
lists with them well
it's interesting you know you say that
because i've certainly met my fair share
of opposition
in the media domain let's say especially
with
you know the legacy media
um but
i'm stunned by the positivity of
the comments it's absolutely
overwhelming i can't really make heads
or tales of it that it's so consistent
and it's been very sustaining to me so
and i i don't really i don't
i guess the reason i think that's the
case is because
i think i'm encouraging people
you know who haven't had any
encouragement or enough and that's lots
of people maybe everyone because i mean
how much
people should be encouraged to the
ultimate degree right they should say
well you want to reveal the divine
within
in your own particular way you could do
that and
you know i'm curious about you did the
reddit ama didn't you a couple times
well i did that i've done it twice now
and i think one
one year
i was like you were first and i was
third and not because they knew me i'm
sure they didn't but i just got on and
said i'm a catholic bishop who loves to
dialogue with non-believers and atheists
or something
right so you were asking also inviting
some
push back there as well so yeah but but
it was
i loved it we got an enormous response
now a fair amount of obscenity and just
people that hate religion see part of it
might be religion that i'm so
institutionally identified with religion
so all that
but but i love both times i did that the
the questions that emerged and the
themes that emerged
were very illuminating to me you know so
no i i've i've loved that world too of
entering into it and it's you know it
certainly gets attention people watch
these videos and then i've done a lot of
you know writing and so on longer form
things i've done documentary films as
well
so what kind of crowd are you getting
now with your youtube channel and your
podcast what what's your audience
numbers yeah we have like 77 million or
something uh
you know total views uh oh yeah on you
on your channel
yeah wow that's that's
that's a lot are people cutting up your
your videos and posting them in pieces
as well
yeah sometimes sometimes um
i'm trying to get the an average it
depends on the type of video we're doing
but yeah we're getting you know good
numbers solid numbers
um not in your ballpark but uh well 77
million total views is like that's far
beyond respectable that's i mean you
know you think about comparing that to
something like a published book i mean
youtube has a reach that's absolutely
staggering right and i appreciate that
very much you know that all these
different forms and then that's just
youtube you know many of all the other
forms of social media so you know i'm
look as an evangelist as someone trying
to speak for the church i'm delighted by
that
and um
you know we just did it we just as as
you did i mean i i think the first video
of yours i saw
you were in a like a poorly lit room
sitting in this chair talking about
nietzsche or something i thought wow
this guy someone said oh he's getting
these enormous numbers and i thought
well but it speaks to the fact it wasn't
the production quality that was doing it
yeah no it wasn't it was it was the it
was the content and the willingness to
talk about important ideas and to do it
in a way that respects the audience i
think all that
uh is is worthwhile you know
well look that was that was really good
um
we got we got nice and deep into it that
yeah i appreciate that very much um
loved it
i wish it
i wish it could have gone on longer i
had more questions but
i think i've i've exhausted my capacity
for for concentration we went for a
couple hours huh yes well it's a good
natural end i would say as well
yeah
no i loved it jordan thank you i
appreciate you taking the time you know
anything else that that you
um
want to say or that we didn't cover
just you know tell
your wife's name is tammy right yes tell
her you know we did just came out with
it it's on youtube a series of
reflections i did on the rosary and i
know with her interest in the rosary
that she just go on youtube and check it
out she might find that interesting yeah
it's too bad we didn't have a chance to
talk to that a little about that because
yeah but just tell her that because i i
love the rosary too it's a great prayer
and it it works at so many different
levels you can look at it
psychologically and even physically you
know what that does to you so have her
look at those maybe and uh you know give
her my best and i remember
we were in rome
right after you and i spoke the first
time our team was in rome doing some
filming and i think we i forget whom we
sent it to somebody in your office but
we did a little video
and i knew that your wife was very sick
at the time i didn't know that you were
on the verge of your issues you know
but i just said we said mass in my room
there in in rome which is in the hotel
room and said it for your wife so we
sent that to you so let her know that we
have been for a long time praying for
the two of you well that's much
appreciated and certainly all the care
that people have shown including the
care that you've shown has been
extraordinarily helpful and she's
listening to you on a regular basis
and she's certainly found the practice
of the rosa tammy is quite a physical
person and yeah so she's it's practice
for her rather than an intellectual
endeavor
not that she's incapable of intellectual
endeavor but she's an adept practitioner
so she's she does as well yoga for years
in your hand matters you know it's a
very physical thing yes well it was it
was it was it was it didn't it helped
her maintain peace while she was facing
death yeah essentially continually and
and so
the the the that's the ritual element
which we never talked about at all
partly i suppose because you know we
tend towards the abstract in the
intellectual but the ritual next time
the ritual shouldn't be
yes exactly the ritual shouldn't be uh
dismissed no i'm a catholic heck
ritual's our whole thing you know
yeah well there's peace in ritual right
that's the thing you know what to expect
it's a place of safety and
and and in a world that changes
constantly
ritual is the only thing that provides
order and so we may need that now more
than ever because things are changing so
unbelievably fast which is also partly
why the church should be careful about
being too relevant it's like yep i agree
i agree yeah all right well thank you
very much no i enjoyed it immensely and
god bless you me too um thank you i need
all the blessing from god i can get i
can tell you that so
i'll keep praying for you thank you very
much
[Music]
you